in this lecture we'll be studying about
inter process communication so inter
process communication means the way in
which processes communicate with each
other so we know that there are
different processes running in our
systems and this processes may need to
communicate with each other
so the way the processes communicate
with each other is known as inter
process communication now processes
executing concurrently in the operating
system may be either independent
processes or cooperating processes now
in the operating system we have two or
more processes that are executing
concurrently which means they are
executing at the same time so when two
or more processes are executing at the
same time in the operating system this
processes may either be independent
processes or cooperating processes so
first let us see what is the meaning of
independent processes and what is the
meaning of cooperating processes so
independent processes are those
processes which cannot affect or be
affected by the other processes
executing in the system so if we say
that the processes are independent that
means that these processes cannot affect
or cannot be affected by other processes
executing in the system so all the
processes may execute in their own ways
and these independent processes are not
affected by other processes and also
they cannot affect other processes in
the system and then we have cooperating
processes these processes are the
processes that can affect or be affected
by the other processes executing in the
system so cooperating processes are
those processes which can affect the
other processes in the system and also
they can be affected by other processes
executing in the system so an example of
this cooperating processes are any
process that shares data with other
process so if one process is sharing
data with another process then we can
say for sure that that process can
affect the other process with which it
is sharing the data so if two processes
are sharing data then those two
processes will be a
affected by each other so those kind of
processes are known as cooperating
processes so if they're independent
processes they are not sharing anything
and they are executing in their own ways
and they are not affected by each other
so there is what we mean by independent
processes and cooperating processes now
if you look at this we can see that
inter process communication will be
required in cooperating processes
because incorporating processes they are
going to be affected by each other and
they may need to communicate with each
other so mostly in the case of
cooperating processes we are going to
need this inter process communication
now there are several reasons for
providing an environment that allows
process cooperation so we may have
several reasons why we need to allow
processes to cooperate with each other
and let's see what are those so the
first one is information sharing
so in this information sharing what we
mean is that several users may be
interested in a single piece of
information for example a shared file
which we just saw before so when several
users are interested in a single piece
of information we will have to provide
an environment in which the information
can be accessed concurrently that means
both the users or several users will be
able to access that information at the
same time so that is one reason why we
need to provide an environment that
allows process cooperation because the
two users or the several users may be
trying to access via different processes
so this processes will need to
communicate or cooperate with each other
in order to provide this information
sharing now the next point is
computational speed up now in order to
achieve computational speed up what we
can do is if we are having a task we
will have to divide that task into
several sub tasks and all this sub task
will be made to run concurrently in that
way we can speed up our system so
instead of taking one task and waiting
for it to complete from the beginning
till the end what we can do is we can
break it down into sub tasks and OH
this sub task will be running
concurrently and hence we can achieve
more speed in our system now when we do
that when the tasks are broken down into
several different tasks they are
assigned to several different processes
they become several different processes
now since all these processes belongs to
one single task or to one main task so
those processes will need to communicate
with each other so this is another
reason why we need to allow the
processes to cooperate with each other
so that we can achieve this
computational speed up by breaking down
the task into several different tasks
and making them to run concurrently now
the next point is modularity so
modularity means we want to design the
system by dividing it in two separate
modules so when we are designing a
system one person is not designing the
entire system we divide the system into
different modules and these modules will
later be put together to work to achieve
a single goal so when we want to achieve
modularity we are dividing the system
into several different modules and also
these modules will need to communicate
or cooperate with each other so this is
another reason why we need to provide an
environment that allows process
cooperation in order to achieve
modularity in our system and then the
next point is convenience so if we allow
the processes to cooperate with each
other or if we provide an environment in
which the processors can cooperate with
each other then that becomes very
convenient for the user for example a
user may be using his system and he may
be doing several different tasks at the
same time he may be listening to music
he may be typing a document or he may be
printing a document at the same time so
when he is doing all these things at the
same time there are different processes
running at the same time so these
processes are running concurrently and
they need to cooperate with each other
so that all the tasks can run smoothly
without clashing with each other so
convenience is another reason why we
need to provide an environment that
allows process cooperation all right so
these are the reasons why we need to
provide
environment that allows process
cooperation now let us see in what ways
can we provide an environment that
allows process cooperation or in what
ways can we let the processes to
cooperate or communicate with each other
how does the inter process communication
actually takes place so that is what we
are going to see now so as I already
told you cooperating processes require
an inter process communication which is
abbreviated as IPC mechanism that will
allow them to exchange data and
information so when the processes need
to cooperate with each other they need
to communicate with each other so for
that we require something known as inter
process communication or IPC which will
allow the processes to exchange data and
information and hence they can have the
communication between each other and
there are two fundamental models of
inter process communication the first
one is called shared memory and the
second one is called message passing now
let us see what are these two models of
inter-process communications and how do
they differ from each other and what do
they actually mean so first of all
talking about shared memory system in
the shared memory model a region of
memory that is shared by cooperating
processes is established and processes
can then exchange information by reading
and writing data to the shared region so
in this shared memory model what happens
is that we established a region of
memory that will be shared by the
cooperating processes so there will be a
portion of memory that can be shared by
all the processes that are cooperating
with each other and what will happen
they will exchange information by
reading and writing data to the shared
region so whenever one process wants to
communicate to another process what it
will do is it will write the information
or the thing that it wants to share or
communicate to the other process into
that shared memory region and in the
other process what it can do is it can
read that data that which was written by
the first process from
the shared memory region and then it
will understand what it actually was
trying to communicate so that is what
happens in the shared memory models and
then the second one is message passing
so in message passing model
communication takes place by means of
messages exchanged between the
cooperating processes so in this message
passing model what happens is that the
communication between the processes they
takes place via messages which the
processes exchanged between each other
so there are messages which will help
them in communicating with each other so
these messages are exchanged between
processes and that is how the
communication takes place in the message
passing model so these are the two
fundamental models of inter process
communication now I will take a diagram
in order to explain this in a better way
so that you can visualize how it
actually happens so here we have two
figures a and B and the first figure it
represents the shared memory
communication model and in the second
figure B it represents the message
passing communication model so if you
look at this in the first figure A which
is the shared memory system we have two
processes process a and process B which
will be cooperating to each other and
which are trying to communicate to each
other and here in between we have the
shared region of memory so when process
a wants to communicate to process B what
it will do is it will write the
information that it wants to communicate
to the shared memory region and what
process B will do is it will read the
information that was written to the
shared memory region by process a and it
will understand what communication was
air trying to make so by the help of the
shared memory region process a was able
to communicate to process B so whatever
information process a put here process B
will be able to read it so process a
writes here and process B reads from
here and it is possible because this is
a shared memory region and it is
accessible to both process a and process
B so
that will be the case even when there
are more processes like this so this is
the example of a shared memory
communication model now the next one
that we have in Figure B is a message
passing communication model so in the
same way here we have two processes
process a and process B which are trying
to communicate to each other and here we
have the kernel and this M they stand
for the messages so when process a wants
to communicate to process B it will send
the message to process B and how will it
send it will create the message and the
message will go to the kernel so the
kernel will get the message and it knows
that this message is for process B so
the kernel will send this message to
process B and process B gets the message
so that is how the message flows in this
message passing model the process a
sends the message to the colonel and the
colonel sent a message to process B so
that is the flow and in that way process
a is able to communicate to process B
via this message passing so that is how
communication takes place in case of a
message passing model so these are the
two most common models of inter process
communication or IPC first is the shared
memory and another one is the message
passing so these are very important
topics in this operating system under
the subtopic of inter process
communication so I hope this was clear
to you thank you for watching and see
you in the next one
[Applause]
[Music]